Do you face ridicule, opposition, or persecution?
Are you trapped in a difficult situation in which there seems to be little you can do
to change your circumstances?
If so, you are not alone.
The Bible tells us that David experienced these things, and David himself tells us how
he coped.
His words found at Psalm 62.5 are, I wait silently for God.
Some scholars believe that David was 15 years old when he was anointed as King.
If so, then he had to wait 22 years before he became King over all Israel.
During several of those years, King Saul chased after David, seeking to kill him.
As a result, David had to live as a fugitive, at times in caves in the wilderness, and
in other times in a foreign country among the enemies of Israel.
David learned patience.
The need to wait on Jehovah.
Let's consider three events that occurred during that period in his life.
First, happened in the wilderness of Ingeti, a place of rough mountains, honeycombed with
roomy caves.
King Saul consumed with envy and hatred, chased after David, intent on killing him.
David and his man hid from him in an immense cave.
They couldn't have been comfortable.
They had no luxuries.
They had to gather food, firewood, and water.
And they had to evade those who wanted them dead.
But then came a surprising and unexpected situation.
Let's read about it.
Please turn in your Bible to 1 Samuel 24.
Beginning with verse 2, I'll give you a moment to find it.
1 Samuel 24 will begin reading from verse 2.
So Saul took 3,000 men, chosen from all Israel, and went to look for David and his men on
the rocky cliffs of the mountain goats.
Saul came to the stone sheepfolds along the road, where there was a cave, and he went in
to relieve himself while David and his men were sitting in the recesses at the back of
the cave.
David's men said to him,
This is the day on which Jehovah is saying to you, look, I am giving your enemy into
your hand, and you can do to him whatever seems good to you.
3,000 well chosen and highly trained soldiers were on the lookout for David.
Imagine the astonishment of David and his men when Saul himself, alone, and unprotected,
strolled into the very cave where they were hiding.
Saul's vision was adjusted to the light outside, so when he peered into the gloom of the cave,
he didn't see that there were men inside.
The men's eyes, however, were already accustomed to the dark, so they could see Saul clearly
against the light of the entrance.
Now Saul was vulnerable, completely in David's power.
Should David do away with him?
As men whispered for him to do just that, surely Jehovah was giving Saul into his hand.
After all, it was God's will that David replaced Saul as king, and didn't David have good
reason to kill him?
Saul was out of control.
He had killed priests at knob, and wiped out the city, men, women, children, animals.
Saul because the high priest, a Himalach, had given David bread for his men to eat.
If David killed Saul, what would be the result?
Deliverance?
An ant was running as a fugitive, no more hiding in caves, the immediate kingship.
Surely all this passed through David's mind.
What would he do?
What would you have done?
Let's continue reading from 1 Samuel 24 and verse 4.
So David rose up, and quietly cut off the edge of Saul's sleeveless coat.
But afterward, David's heart kept striking him because he had cut off the edge of Saul's
sleeveless coat.
He said to his men,
It is unthinkable from Jehovah's standpoint that I should do such a thing to my Lord,
the anointed of Jehovah by lifting my hand against him, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.
So David restrained his men with these words, and he did not allow them to attack Saul.
As for Saul, he rose up from the cave and went on his way.
David didn't listen to his men.
Instead, he took advantage of the situation to show that, wasn't a rebel, and that he
didn't seek revenge for Saul's unfair and cruel treatment.
That took self-restraint.
It also required faith.
Faith that Jehovah would correct matters in his own time and way.
His thinking is reflected not only in what he said to Saul, but also in what he wrote
in Psalm 57.
Verse 3 of that Psalm says,
Jehovah will send help from heaven and save me.
He will frustrate the one snapping at me.
We at times may find it difficult to exercise patience, especially when we're suffering
unjustly.
Often, we can do little to change things.
But what if an easy way out presents itself?
We should be like David, who first considered Jehovah's viewpoint.
Sometimes we should act, but sometimes it's best to wait for Jehovah to correct matters
in his due time.
Let's read what happened after Saul left the cave.
We'll start from 1 Samuel 24 and verse 8.
That's verse 8.
Then David got up and went out from the cave and called out after Saul.
My Lord, the King!
David?
When Saul looked behind him, David bowed down low with his face to the ground and prostrated
himself.
David said to Saul,
Why do you listen to the words of men who say,
Look, David is seeking to harm you.
This very day, your own eyes have seen how Jehovah gave you into my hand in the cave.
But when someone said to kill you, I had pity on you and said,
I will not lift my hand against my Lord, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.
And look, my Father, yes, see the edge of your sleeveless coat in my hand.
When I cut off the edge of your sleeveless coat, I did not kill you.
You can now see and understand that I do not intend to harm you or to rebel.
And I have not sinned against you, whereas you are hunting me down to take my life.
Major Jehovah judged between you and me.
And Major Jehovah take vengeance on you for me, but my hand will not come against you.
Just as the ancient proverb says, from the wicked comes wickedness.
But my hand will not come against you.
After whom has the King of Israel gone out?
Who are you chasing?
A dead dog?
A single flea?
Major Jehovah be the judge.
And he will judge between you and me.
And he will see and will plead my case.
And judge me and rescue me from your hand.
By showing restraint, David gave answer to those who had been telling Saul that David
was seeking to harm him.
He hadn't lifted his hand against Saul.
Twice.
He told Saul that it would be Jehovah who would judge between them.
Though Saul was hunting him without cause, David did not speak abusively to Saul.
He was respectful and humble as he told Saul he would wait for Jehovah to set things
straight.
What a powerful message that was to all who learned of the matter.
Saul was stunned to learn that David had spared his life.
And he called out to him, Jehovah will reward you with good because of what you have done
for me today.
I know that you will surely rule as king, and that in your hand the kingdom of Israel
will endure.
The Apostle Paul may have thought of this incident when he counseled Christians in Rome
centuries later.
Do not avenge yourselves.
Keep conquering the evil with the good.
Sometimes our good actions and speech can have a positive effect on those who oppose
us.
Saul was deeply moved by David's mercy, but would he stop seeking to kill him?
We'll see.
Because of our imperfection, though, we at times failed to exercise patience, and David
was no exception.
One situation angered him so much he nearly acted in a way that would have had terrible
consequences.
Let's read about it.
In 1 Samuel 25, that's chapter 25 now, and verse 1.
1 Samuel 25, beginning with verse 1.
In time Samuel died, and all Israel gathered together to mourn for him and to bury him
at his house in Rema.
Then David rose and went down to the wilderness of Payran.
Now there was a man in Mayon whose work was in Carmel.
The man was very wealthy.
He had 3,000 sheep and 1,000 goats, and he was then shearing his sheep at Carmel.
The man's name was Nebel, and his wife's name was Abigail.
The wife was discerning and beautiful, but the husband, Akela bite, was harsh, and he
behaved badly.
David heard in the wilderness that Nebel was shearing his sheep, so David sent ten young
men to him, and David told the young men,
go up to Carmel, and when you come to Nebel, ask him in my name about his welfare.
Then say, may you live long, and may you be well, and may your household be well, and
may all that you have be well.
Now I hear that you are doing your shearing, when your shepherds were with us, we did not
harm them, and they found nothing missing the whole time they were in Carmel.
Ask your young men, and they will tell you,
may my young men find favor in your eyes, because we have come at a joyous time.
Please, give to your servants and to your son, David, whatever you can spare.
So David's young men went and told all of this to Nebel in David's name.
When they finished, Nebel answered David's servants,
who is David, and who is the son of Jesse?
Nowadays many servants are breaking away from their masters.
You I have to take my bread and my water, and the meat that I butchered for my shears,
and give it to men who come from who knows where?
Sheep shearing was a time of joy and festivities, and Nebel had reason to rejoice.
He had many sheep, and they had been protected from bands of robbers by David's men.
Similarly, it would be expected for Nebel to show appreciation and generosity,
but when David's men politely requested food, not only did he refuse, he screamed insults.
Let's see how David reacted by continuing to read from 1st Samuel 25, beginning with verse 12.
At that, David's young men returned and reported all these words to him.
David immediately said to his men,
so they all strapped on their swords, and David also strapped on his own sword,
and about 400 men went up with David, while 200 men stayed with the baggage.
Meanwhile, one of the servants reported to Abigail Nebel's wife.
Look, David said messengers from the wilderness to wish our master well,
but he screamed insults at them.
Those men were very good to us.
They never harmed us, and we did not miss a single thing the whole time we were together with them in the fields.
They were like a protective wall around us, both by night and by day,
the whole time we were with them shepherding the flock.
Now decide what you are going to do.
For disaster has been determined against our master, and against all his house,
and he is such a worthless man that no one can speak to him.
So Abigail quickly took 200 loaves of bread, two large jars of wine, five dress sheep,
five sea of measures of roasted grain, 100 cakes of raisins, and 200 cakes of pressed figs,
and put all of it on the dunkeys.
Then she said to her servants,
go on ahead of me, I will follow you.
But she said nothing to her husband, Nebel.
While she was riding on the dunkey, and going down under cover of the mountain,
just then David and his men were coming down toward her, and she met them.
Now David had been saying,
it was for nothing that I guarded everything that belongs to this fellow in the wilderness.
Not a single thing belonging to him went missing,
and yet he repays me evil for good.
May God do the same and more to the enemies of David,
if I allow a single male of his to survive until the morning.
When David learned what Nebel had said,
he was furious. Immediately,
had without consulting Jehovah, David told his men to strap on their swords.
Then they set out to wipe out every male and Nebel's household.
This was wrong. Nebel was a despicable man,
but while David deserved compensation for the protection he'd given to Nebel,
he had no legal right to Nebel's property.
And there was absolutely no reason to murder an Israelite brother
at his entire household.
Meanwhile, one of Nebel's servants discerned the imminent disaster
and had the courage to report what had happened to Abigail, Nebel's wife.
He didn't warn Nebel who wouldn't have listened,
but he found a hearing ear with Abigail,
who was a woman of discernment who loved Jehovah.
We know little of her background,
but life with Nebel must have been difficult.
He was harsh, unthankful, and arrogant.
Perhaps she was trapped in an arranged marriage.
Senselessness is with him. Abigail later said to David,
this spiritual woman would not likely have said that,
unless her husband had caused her to lose the last
vestige of love and respect for him.
Abigail listened to the servant,
and realized that something had to be done immediately.
But what?
Should she speak with Nebel?
No, she couldn't reason with him.
Should she run away?
If David was anything like Nebel,
that might have been the smart thing to do.
But Abigail knew that David was a reasonable man,
who loved Jehovah.
Quickly, she gathered food and sat out to meet him.
Let's read the account from 1 Samuel 25 and verse 23.
When Abigail caught sight of David,
she hurried down off the donkey,
and threw herself face down before David,
bowing to the ground.
She then fell at his feet and said,
My Lord, let the blame be on me.
Let your servant girl speak to you and listen to the words of your servant girl.
Please, do not let my Lord pay attention to this worthless Nebel,
for he is just like his name.
Nebel is his name, and senselessness is with him.
But I, your servant girl, did not see my Lord's young men whom you sent.
And now, my Lord, as surely as Jehovah is living,
and as you are living, it is Jehovah who has held you back from incurring blood guilt
and from taking revenge with your own hand.
May your enemies and those seeking injury to my Lord become like Nebel.
Now, let this gift that your servant girl has brought to my Lord,
be given to the young men who are following my Lord.
Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl.
For Jehovah will without fail make for my Lord a lasting house,
because my Lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah,
and no evil has been found in you all your days.
When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life,
the life of my Lord will be wrapped securely in the bag of life with Jehovah your God,
but the lives of your enemies, he will hurl away like stones from a sling.
And when Jehovah has done for my Lord all the good things he has promised,
and he appoints you as leader over Israel,
you will have no remorse or regret in your heart for shedding blood without cause,
and for letting the hand of my Lord take revenge.
When Jehovah confers good upon my Lord, remember your servant girl.
Abigail's words to David were those of a wise and spiritual woman.
Her approach was humble, and deeply respectful, but her message was clear.
She said that Jehovah had sent her to David to prevent him from incurring blood guilt,
from shedding blood without cause, from taking revenge, and from doing something
that would cause David regret and remorse, casting a shadow on the rest of his life.
Abigail reminded David of these important truths.
Jehovah would correct the wrong, and David should not avenge himself.
Her appeal mirrored at David's reason for not going against Saul at Anguidi.
Perhaps she'd learned about how David had spared Saul's life in the cave.
Abigail's message?
Be patient.
Let Jehovah sort things out in his own time and way.
How did David respond to her?
The account continues from 1 Samuel 25 and verse 32.
At this day, it said to Abigail,
Praise Jehovah the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me,
and bless me your good sense.
May you be blessed for restraining me this day from incurring blood guilt and from taking revenge
with my own hands. Otherwise, as surely as Jehovah the God of Israel, who held me back from
harming you as living, if you would not come quickly to meet me,
by mourning there would not have remained a single male belonging to Naible.
With that, David accepted from her what she had brought him and said to her,
Go up in peace to your house. See, I have listened to you, and I will grant your request.
David listened. In a society where men did not welcome the advice of women,
this was not worthy. David listened, understood, agreed, and changed his
course. Perhaps David's men were eager to fight and to plunder, but David held them back.
Like David, we too may set out on a course that's not wise. Like David, we should listen to those
who tried to correct us. About 10 days later, Jehovah struck Naible, and he died.
Afterward, Abigail became David's wife. But what of Saul?
Though he was humbled by the events in the cave, he didn't give up on chasing David.
This time, David and his men were in the wilderness of Zif. For the second time, David was betrayed
by the men of Zif, people from his own tribe. Let's read about it. From 1 Samuel 26,
beginning with verse 2. So Saul rose up and went down to the wilderness of Zif with 3,000
chosen men of Israel to look for David in the wilderness of Zif. Saul camped on the hill of Hakaila,
which faces Jashimen by the road. David was then living in the wilderness, and he learned that Saul
had come into the wilderness after him. So David sent spies to verify that Saul had indeed come.
David later went to the place where Saul had encamped, and David saw the place where Saul and
Abner the son of Nur, the chief of his army, were lying asleep. Saul lay asleep in the camping
closure with the troops camping all around him. Then David said to him, elect the Hittite,
and Abishai the son of Zuruya, the brother of Joab, who will go down with me into the camp to Saul.
Abishai replied, I will go down with you. So David and Abishai made their way to the troops by
night, and they found Saul lying asleep in the camping closure with his spear stuck into the ground
next to his head. Abner and the troops were lying all around him. Abishai now said to David,
today God has surrendered your enemy into your hand, and now please let me pin him to the ground
with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice. In the cave, Saul had come to David.
This time David came to Saul. With him was his nephew Abishai, a courageous warrior.
They moved stealthily by moonlight through the ranks of Saul's sleeping men to the place
where Saul was sleeping. Now for a second time, Saul was in David's power. Abishai offered to
pin Saul to the ground. To him, he seemed logical to do away with the one who had so relentlessly
been seeking to kill them. David would need to do nothing. He could later credit the killing to
Abishai. But David sees the opportunity to get rid of his enemy once and for all, to get the answer.
Let's continue our reading from 1 Samuel 26 and verse 9.
However, David said to Abishai,
Do not harm him for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Chahova and remain innocent.
David continued,
As surely as Chahova is living, Chahova himself will strike him down, or his day will come and he will
die, or he will go down into battle and perish. It is unthinkable from Chahova's standpoint for me
to lift my hand against the anointed of Chahova. So now take, please, the spear next to his head
and the water jug and let us be on our way. So David took the spear and the water jug from next to
Saul's head and they went away. No one saw or noticed them or woke up for they were all asleep
because a deep sleep from Chahova had fallen upon them. David didn't fool himself into thinking
it would be acceptable for Abishai to act against Saul. He recognized that Chahova would deal with Saul.
Once again, he waited on Chahova to correct the situation.
David considered how Chahova might act in his behalf in the future, whispering to Abishai that
Saul might die in battle. Over a year later, that's what happened.
Life was stressful for David during the years he lived as a fugitive, but he never became impatient
with Chahova and he did what he could under the circumstances. As he was living among the
Philistines, for example, David seized the opportunity to protect Israel by attacking the nation's
enemies. When we face difficulties, we too can make the best of our situation by doing what we
can, confident that Chahova will bring relief at the best possible time. Eventually, David did become
and he ran for 40 years. Toward the end of his life, he wrote Psalm 37.
Perhaps the three events that we've considered were on David's mind as he composed that Psalm.
He wrote about patience. The need to wait on Chahova and the certain fulfillment of Chahova's promises.
That Psalm contains both counsel and encouragement for us. Let's conclude by reading those inspired
words. Let's turn to Psalm 37 verses 1 to 7. I'll give you a moment to find that. Psalm 37
verses 1 to 7. Do not be upset because of evil men or envious of wrongdoers. They will quickly
wither like grass and shrivel like green new grass. Trust in Chahova and do what is good,
reside in the earth and act with faithfulness. Find exquisite delight in Chahova and he will grant you
the desires of your heart. Commit your way to Chahova, rely on him and he will act in your behalf.
He will make your righteousness shine like daybreak and your justice like the midday sun.
Keep silent before Chahova and wait expectantly for him.